Add basic auth to Java client / Spring SDK (#5139)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/apis-tools/java-client/authentication.md

---
id: authentication
title: "Authentication"
sidebar_label: "Authentication"
description: "Authenticating the Java client."
keywords: ["authentication", "username", "password", "basic", "oauth", "x509"]
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

There are different ways to authenticate to your cluster. The following sections describe how to authenticate using the Java client.

<Tabs groupId="authenticationMethods" defaultValue="basic" queryString values={[{label: 'Basic', value: 'basic' },{label: 'OIDC', value: 'oidc' },{label: 'X.509', value: 'x509' }]}>

<TabItem value="basic">

In Java code, create a `BasicAuthCredentialsProvider` and provide it with your username and password.

```java
final var credentialsProvider =
  new BasicAuthCredentialsProviderBuilder()

>     .applyEnvironmentOverrides(false)

Reviewer: 🔧  I wonder whether we actually should include it in this sample? Maybe we could just indicate with a comment that this is done to change the default to ensure these are always used?

Reviewer: see comment in the Env Var section, I would propose to only raise this option there and explain it.

    .username(username)
    .password(password)
    .build();
```

Next you need to provide the credentials provider to the client builder.

```java
final var client = CamundaClient.newClientBuilder()
   // other configuration
  .credentialsProvider(credentialsProvider)
  .build();
```

The client will now add an `Authorization` header to each request with the value `Basic username:password`. `username:password`
is base64 encoded.

### Environment Variables

You can also use environment variables to provide the username and password. The following environment variables are supported:

```bash
export CAMUNDA_BASIC_AUTH_USERNAME='username'
export CAMUNDA_BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD='password'
```

> When using environment variables you don't have to provide the username and password to the `CredentialsProvider`. You have
> to make sure that environment overrides are applied. You can do this by explicitly setting the flag to `true`, or by omitting
> it from the builder. By default, environment overrides are applied.

Reviewer: 🔧 
```suggestion
When using environment variables you don't have to provide the username and password to the `CredentialsProvider`.

Environment variables will by default override any values provided in Java code. You can enforce that Java code values have precedence via the `.applyEnvironmentOverrides(false)` API on the `BasicAuthCredentialsProviderBuilder`.
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="oidc">

In Java code, create an `OAuthCredentialsProvider` and provide it with the connection properties.

```java
private static final String audience = "[Zeebe Token Audience, e.g., zeebe.camunda.io]";
private static final String clientId = "[Client ID, e.g., FmT7K8gVv_FcwiUhc8U-fAJ9wph0Kn~P]";
private static final String clientSecret = "[Client Secret]";
private static final String authorizationServer = "[OAuth API, e.g., https://login.cloud.camunda.io/oauth/token]";

final var credentialsProvider =
  new OAuthCredentialsProviderBuilder()

>     .applyEnvironmentOverrides(false)

Reviewer: 🔧  similar proposal as for basic auth, not mentioning it here but only in the Env Var section

    .authorizationServerUrl(authorizationServer)
    .audience(audience)
    .clientId(clientId)
    .clientSecret(clientSecret)
    .build();
```

Next you need to provide the credentials provider to the client builder.

```java
final var client = CamundaClient.newClientBuilder()
   // other configuration
  .credentialsProvider(credentialsProvider)
  .build();
```

The client will now add an `Authorization` header to each request with the value `Bearer <token>`. The token is obtained by making a request to the authorization server.
Note that the token is cached to not make unnecessary requests to the authorization server. The token is lazily refreshed once expired.

### Environment Variables

You can also use environment variables to provide the properties. The following environment variables are supported:

```bash
export CAMUNDA_AUTHORIZATION_SERVER_URL='[OAuth API, e.g., https://login.cloud.camunda.io/oauth/token]'
export CAMUNDA_TOKEN_AUDIENCE='[Zeebe Token Audience, e.g., zeebe.camunda.io]'
export CAMUNDA_CLIENT_ID='[Client ID, e.g., FmT7K8gVv_FcwiUhc8U-fAJ9wph0Kn~P]'
export CAMUNDA_CLIENT_SECRET='[Client Secret]'
```

> When using environment variables you don't have to provide the properties to the `CredentialsProvider`. You have
> to make sure that environment overrides are applied. You can do this by explicitly setting the flag to `true`, or by omitting
> it from the builder. By default, environment overrides are applied.

Reviewer: 🔧 
```suggestion
When using environment variables you don't have to provide the username and password to the `CredentialsProvider`.

Environment variables will by default override any values provided in Java code. You can enforce that Java code values have precedence via the `.applyEnvironmentOverrides(false)` API on the `BasicAuthCredentialsProviderBuilder`.
```
